control and coordination animals nervous
system hello friends welcome to today's
class in our previous class we have
learned many important things about life
processes and how it involves in the
maintenance of living organisms in
today's class let us learn about control
and coordination in our earlier class we
have learned that movement is an
indication of life process but sometimes
Moumen associates with growth like seed
germination and some other times it
doesn't associate with growth like
movement of sunflower in case of animals
or human beings most of the movements
are in response to changes in the
environment example when we touch a hard
body we withdraw hand immediately we
detect the change of the heart body and
respond to it by moving hand away from
hard body to protect from burned any
movement in response to environment is
controlled by a system in the body for
example when we are in class if we want
to speak to a friend generally we speak
in lower voice or whispers rather than
shouting why because we can recognize
the environment around us in the class
here movement is whether to whisper or
shout and the environment is class
therefore control movement must be
connected to recognition of various
events in environment followed by
correct movement in response for example
when you are climbing stairs how can you
manage to climb without falling usually
when we climb anything we try to take
support of something with or without our
knowledge in this case support we take
is a controlled movement in response to
stairs by recognizing the environment
that you may fall if we don't take
support
have you ever wondered how all these
activities works in such coordination in
perfect compatibility with control over
the moments that's all due to
functioning of a nervous system
perfectly all these activities are
controlled and managed by the nervous
system now let us discuss about the
nervous system in animals in detail and
let us learn a few more interesting
things as we learned earlier based on
body organization in multicellular
organisms specialized tissues and
specialized system are involved to
perform these functions in animals
control and coordination are performed
by nervous and muscular system let us
discuss how nervous and muscular system
coordinates with each other for example
if you need to pick an object from the
ground then how will you pick it we need
to focus on the object then bend our
backbone that is vertebral column then
bend your legs
finally hands have to pick and fingers
have to grasp it here we can find how
many organs are coordinated in such a
small activity the vertebral column legs
eyes hands and even fingers with all
they together coordinates then an
activity can be completed how the
nervous system detects a change in the
environment or recognizes the
information in environment it can
recognize or detect with the help of
special cells of nervous system called
as neurons which respond to stimuli and
coordinates with their activity a system
made up of nerve cells is called as
nervous system